.. _extending:

Extending kRPC
==============

The kRPC Architecture
---------------------

kRPC consists of two components: a server and a client. The server plugin
(provided by ``KRPC.dll``) runs inside KSP. It provides a collection of
*procedures* that clients can run. These procedures are arranged in groups
called *services* to keep things organized. It also provides an in-game user
interface that can be used to start/stop the server, change settings and monitor
active clients.

Clients run outside of KSP. This gives you the freedom to run scripts in
whatever environment you want. A client communicates with the server to run
procedures using a :ref:`communication protocol <communication-protocol>`.  kRPC
comes with several client libraries that implement this communication protocol,
making it easier to write programs in these languages.

kRPC comes with a collection of standard functionality for interacting with
vessels, contained in a service called ``SpaceCenter``. This service provides
procedures for things like getting flight/orbital data and controlling the
active vessel. This service is provided by ``KRPC.SpaceCenter.dll``.

Service API
-----------

Third party mods can add functionality to kRPC using the *Service API*. This is
done by adding :ref:`attributes <service-api-attributes>` to your own classes,
methods and properties to make them visible through the server. When the kRPC
server starts, it scans all the assemblies loaded by the game, looking for
classes, methods and properties with these attributes.

The following example implements a service that can control the throttle and
staging of the active vessel. To add this to the server, compile the code and
place the DLL in your GameData directory.

.. literalinclude:: /scripts/ServiceAPIExample.lib.cs
   :language: csharp

The following example shows how this service can then be used from a python client:

.. literalinclude:: /scripts/ServiceAPIExample.py
   :language: python

Some of the client libraries automatically pick up changes to the functionality
provided by the server, including the Python and Lua clients. However, some
clients require code to be generated from the service assembly so that they can
interact with new or changed functionality. See :ref:`clientgen
<service-api-clientgen>` for details on how to generate this code.

.. _service-api-attributes:

Attributes
^^^^^^^^^^

The following `C# attributes
<https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992.aspx>`_ can be used to add
functionality to the kRPC server.

.. csharp:attribute:: KRPCService (string Name, KRPC.Service.GameScene GameScene)

   :parameters:

    * **Name** -- Optional name for the service. If omitted, the service name is
      set to the name of the class this attribute is applied to.

    * **GameScene** -- The game scenes in which the services procedures are
      available.

   This `attribute <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992.aspx>`_ is
   applied to a static class, to indicate that all methods, properties and
   classes declared within it are part of the the same service. The name of the
   service is set to the name of the class, or -- if present -- the ``Name``
   parameter.

   Multiple services with the same name can be declared, as long the classes,
   procedures and methods they contain have unique names. The classes will be
   merged to appear as a single service on the server.

   The type to which this attribute is applied must satisfy the following
   criteria:

   * The type must be a class.

   * The class must be ``public static``.

   * The name of the class, or the ``Name`` parameter if specified, must be a
     valid :ref:`kRPC identifier <service-api-identifiers>`.

   * The class must not be declared within another class that has the
     :csharp:attr:`KRPCService` attribute. Nesting of services is not permitted.

   Services are configured to be available in specific :ref:`game scenes
   <service-api-game-scenes>` via the ``GameScene`` parameter. If the
   ``GameScene`` parameter is not specified, the service is available in any
   scene. If a procedure is called when the service is not available, it will
   throw an exception.

   **Examples**

   * Declare a service called ``EVA``:

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCService]
        public static class EVA {
            ...
        }

   * Declare a service called ``MyEVAService`` (different to the name of the
     class):

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCService (Name = "MyEVAService")]
        public static class EVA {
            ...
        }

   * Declare a service called ``FlightTools`` that is only available during the
     ``Flight`` game scene:

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCService (GameScene = GameScene.Flight)]
        public static class FlightTools {
            ...
        }

.. csharp:attribute:: KRPCProcedure

   This `attribute <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992.aspx>`_ is
   applied to static methods, to add them to the server as procedures.

   The method to which this attribute is applied must satisfy the following
   criteria:

   * The method must be ``public static``.

   * The name of the method must be a valid :ref:`kRPC identifier
     <service-api-identifiers>`.

   * The method must be declared inside a class that is a :csharp:attr:`KRPCService`.

   * The parameter types and return type must be :ref:`types that kRPC knows how
     to serialize <service-api-serializable-types>`.

   * Parameters can have default arguments.

   **Example**

   The following defines a service called ``EVA`` with a ``PlantFlag`` procedure
   that takes a name and an optional description, and returns a ``Flag`` object.

   .. code-block:: csharp

      [KRPCService]
      public static class EVA {
          [KRPCProcedure]
          public static Flag PlantFlag (string name, string description = "")
          {
              ...
          }
      }

   This can be called from a python client as follows:

   .. code-block:: python

      import krpc
      conn = krpc.connect()
      flag = conn.eva.plant_flag('Landing Site', 'One small step for Kerbal-kind')

.. csharp:attribute:: KRPCClass (string Service)

   :parameters:

    * **Service** -- Optional name of the service to add this class to. If
      omitted, the class is added to the service that contains its definition.

   This `attribute <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992.aspx>`_ is
   applied to non-static classes. It adds the class to the server, so that
   references to instances of the class can be passed between client and server.

   A :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass` must be part of a service, just like a
   :csharp:attr:`KRPCProcedure`. However, it would be restrictive if the class
   had to be declared as a nested class inside a class with the
   :csharp:attr:`KRPCService` attribute. Therefore, a :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass`
   can be declared outside of any service if it has the ``Service`` parameter
   set to the name of the service that it is part of. Also, the service that the
   ``Service`` parameter refers to does not have to exist. If it does not exist,
   a service with the given name is created.

   The class to which this attribute is applied must satisfy the following
   criteria:

   * The class must be ``public`` and *not* ``static``.

   * The name of the class must be a valid :ref:`kRPC identifier
     <service-api-identifiers>`.

   * The class must either be declared inside a class that is a
     :csharp:attr:`KRPCService`, or have its ``Service`` parameter set to the
     name of the service it is part of.

   **Examples**

   * Declare a class called ``Flag`` in the ``EVA`` service:

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCService]
        public static class EVA {
            [KRPCClass]
            public class Flag {
                ...
            }
        }

   * Declare a class called ``Flag``, without nesting the class definition in a
     service class:

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCClass (Service = "EVA")]
        public class Flag {
            ...
        }

.. csharp:attribute:: KRPCMethod

   This `attribute <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992.aspx>`_ is
   applied to methods inside a :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass`. This allows a client
   to call methods on an instance, or static methods in the class.

   The method to which this attribute is applied must satisfy the following
   criteria:

   * The method must be ``public``.

   * The name of the method must be a valid :ref:`kRPC identifier
     <service-api-identifiers>`.

   * The method must be declared in a :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass`.

   * The parameter types and return type must be :ref:`types that kRPC can
     serialize <service-api-serializable-types>`.

   * Parameters can have default arguments.

   **Example**

   Declare a ``Remove`` method in the ``Flag`` class:

   .. code-block:: csharp

      [KRPCClass (Service = "EVA")]
      public class Flag {
          [KRPCMethod]
          void Remove()
          {
              ...
          }
      }

.. csharp:attribute:: KRPCProperty

   This `attribute <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992.aspx>`_ is
   applied to class properties, and comes in two flavors:

   1. Applied to static properties in a :csharp:attr:`KRPCService`. In this
      case, the property must satisfy the following criteria:

      * Must be ``public static`` and have at least one publicly accessible
        getter or setter.

      * The name of the property must be a valid :ref:`kRPC identifier
        <service-api-identifiers>`.

      * Must be declared inside a :csharp:attr:`KRPCService`.

   2. Applied to non-static properties in a :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass`. In this
      case, the property must satisfy the following criteria:

      * Must be ``public`` and *not* ``static``, and have at least one publicly
        accessible getter or setter.

      * The name of the property must be a valid :ref:`kRPC identifier
        <service-api-identifiers>`.

      * Must be declared inside a :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass`.

   **Examples**

   * Applied to a static property in a service:

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCService]
        public static class EVA {
            [KRPCProperty]
            public Flag LastFlag
            {
                get { ... }
            }
        }

     This property can be accessed from a python client as follows:

     .. code-block:: python

        import krpc
        conn = krpc.connect()
        flag = conn.eva.last_flag

   * Applied to a non-static property in a class:

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCClass (Service = "EVA")]
        public class Flag {
            [KRPCProperty]
            public void Name { get; set; }

            [KRPCProperty]
            public void Description { get; set; }
        }

.. csharp:attribute:: KRPCEnum (string Service)

   :parameters:

    * **Service** -- Optional name of the service to add this enum to. If
      omitted, the enum is added to the service that contains its definition.

   This `attribute <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992.aspx>`_ is
   applied to enumeration types. It adds the enumeration and its permissible
   values to the server. This attribute works similarly to
   :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass`, but is applied to enumeration types.

   A :csharp:attr:`KRPCEnum` must be part of a service, just like a
   :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass`. Similarly, a :csharp:attr:`KRPCEnum` can be
   declared outside of a service if it has its ``Service`` parameter set to the
   name of the service that it is part of.

   The enumeration type to which this attribute is applied must satisfy the
   following criteria:

   * The enumeration must be ``public``.

   * The name of the enumeration must be a valid :ref:`kRPC identifier
     <service-api-identifiers>`.

   * The enumeration must either be declared inside a
     :csharp:attr:`KRPCService`, or have it's ``Service`` parameter set to the
     name of the service it is part of.

   * The `underlying C# type
     <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-gb/library/sbbt4032.aspx>`_ must be an
     ``int``.

   **Examples**

   * Declare an enumeration type with two values:

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCEnum (Service = "EVA")]
        public enum FlagState {
            Raised,
            Lowered
        }

     This can be used from a python client as follows:

     .. code-block:: python

        import krpc
        conn = krpc.connect()
        state = conn.eva.FlagState.lowered

.. csharp:attribute:: KRPCDefaultValue (string Name, Type ValueConstructor)

   :parameters:

    * **Name** -- Name of the parameter to set the default value for.
    * **ValueConstructor** -- Type of a static class with a Create method that
      returns an instance of the default value.

   This `attribute <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992.aspx>`_
   can be applied to a kRPC method or procedure. It provides a workaround to set
   the default value of a parameter to a non-compile time constant.
   Ordinarily, C# only allows compile time constants to be used as the values
   of default arguments.

   The ValueConstructor parameter is the type of a static class that contains a
   static method, called Create. When invoke, this method should return the
   default value.

   Note: If you just want to set the default value to a compile time constant,
   use the C# syntax. kRPC will detect the default values and use them.

   **Examples**

   * Set the default value to a list:

     .. code-block:: csharp


        public static class DefaultKerbals
        {
            public static IList<string> Create ()
            {
                return new List<string> { "Jeb", "Bill", "Bob" };
            }
        }

        [KRPCProcedure]
        [KRPCDefaultValue ("names", typeof(DefaultKerbals))]
        public static void HireKerbals (IList<string> names)
        {
            ...
        }

   * Set the default value to a compile time constant, which does not require
     the KRPCDefaultValue attribute:

     .. code-block:: csharp

        [KRPCProcedure]
        public static void HireKerbal (string name = "Jeb")
        {
            ...
        }

.. _service-api-identifiers:

Identifiers
^^^^^^^^^^^

An identifier must only contain alphanumeric characters and underscores. An
identifier must not start with an underscore. Identifiers should follow
`CamelCase <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CamelCase>`_ capitalization
conventions.

.. note:: Although underscores are permitted, they should be avoided as they are
          used for internal name mangling.

.. _service-api-serializable-types:

Serializable Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A type can only be used as a parameter or return type if kRPC knows how to
serialize it. The following types are serializable:

* The C# types ``double``, ``float``, ``int``, ``long``, ``uint``, ``ulong``,
  ``bool``, ``string`` and ``byte[]``

* Any type annotated with :csharp:attr:`KRPCClass`

* Any type annotated with :csharp:attr:`KRPCEnum`

* Collections of serializable types:

  * ``System.Collections.Generic.IList<T>`` where ``T`` is a serializable type

  * ``System.Collections.Generic.IDictionary<K,V>`` where ``K`` is one of
    ``int``, ``long``, ``uint``, ``ulong``, ``bool`` or ``string`` and ``V`` is
    a serializable type

  * ``System.Collections.HashSet<V>`` where ``V`` is a serializable type

* Return types can be ``void``

* Protocol buffer message types from namespace ``KRPC.Schema.KRPC``

.. _service-api-game-scenes:

Game Scenes
^^^^^^^^^^^

Each service is configured to be available from a particular game scene, or
scenes.

.. csharp:enum:: KRPC.Service.GameScene

   .. csharp:value:: SpaceCenter

      The game scene showing the Kerbal Space Center buildings.

   .. csharp:value:: Flight

      The game scene showing a vessel in flight (or on the launchpad/runway).

   .. csharp:value:: TrackingStation

      The tracking station.

   .. csharp:value:: EditorVAB

      The Vehicle Assembly Building.

   .. csharp:value:: EditorSPH

      The Space Plane Hangar.

   .. csharp:value:: Editor

      Either the VAB or the SPH.

   .. csharp:value:: All

      All game scenes.

**Examples**

* Declare a service that is available in the :csharp:enum:`KRPC.Service.GameScene.Flight`
  game scene:

  .. code-block:: csharp

     [KRPCService (GameScene = GameScene.Flight)]
     public static class MyService {
        ...
     }

* Declare a service that is available in the :csharp:enum:`KRPC.Service.GameScene.Flight` and
  :csharp:enum:`KRPC.Service.GameScene.Editor` game scenes:

  .. code-block:: csharp

     [KRPCService (GameScene = (GameScene.Flight | GameScene.Editor))]
     public static class MyService {
        ...
     }

Documentation
-------------

Documentation can be added using
`C# XML documentation <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa288481%28v=vs.71%29.aspx>`_.
The documentation will be automatically exported to clients when they connect.

Further Examples
----------------

See the `SpaceCenter service implementation
<https://github.com/krpc/krpc/tree/latest-version/service/SpaceCenter/src/Services>`_
for more extensive examples.

.. _service-api-clientgen:

Generating Service Code for Static Clients
------------------------------------------

Some of the client libraries dynamically construct the code necessary to
interact with the server when they connect. This means that these libraries will
automatically pick up changes to service code. Such client libraries include
those for Python and Lua.

Other client libraries required code to be generated and compiled into them
statically. They do not automatically pick up changes to service code. Such
client libraries include those for C++ and C#.

Code for these 'static' libraries is generated using the krpc-clientgen
tool. This is provided as part of the `krpctools python package
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/krpctools>`_. It can be installed using pip:

``pip install krpctools``

You can then run the script from the command line:

.. code-block:: console

   $ krpc-clientgen --help

   usage: krpc-clientgen [-h] [-v] [-o OUTPUT] [--ksp KSP]
                         [--output-defs OUTPUT_DEFS]
                         {cpp,csharp,java} service input [input ...]

   Generate client source code for kRPC services.

   positional arguments:
     {cpp,csharp,java}     Language to generate
     service               Name of service to generate
     input                 Path to service definition JSON file or assembly
                           DLL(s)

   optional arguments:
     -h, --help            show this help message and exit
     -v, --version         show program's version number and exit
     -o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT
                           Path to write source code to. If not specified, writes
                           source code to standard output.
     --ksp KSP             Path to Kerbal Space Program directory. Required when
                           reading from an assembly DLL(s)
     --output-defs OUTPUT_DEFS
                           When generting client code from a DLL, output the
                           service definitions to the given JSON file

Client code can be generated either directly from an assembly DLL containing the
service, or from a JSON file that has previously been generated from an
assembly DLL (using the ``--output-defs`` flag).

Generating client code from an assembly DLL requires a copy of Kerbal Space
Program and a C# runtime to be available on the machine. In contrast, generating
client code from a JSON file does not have these requirements and so is more
portable.

Example
^^^^^^^

The following demonstrates how to generate code for the C++ and C# clients to
interact with the LaunchControl service, given in an example previously.

krpc-clientgen expects to be passed the location of your copy of Kerbal Space
Program, the name of the language to generate, the name of the service (from the
:csharp:attr:`KRPCService` attribute), a path to the assembly containing the
service and the path to write the generated code to.

For C++, run the following:

``krpc-clientgen --ksp=/path/to/ksp cpp LaunchControl LaunchControl.dll launch_control.hpp``

To then use the LaunchControl service from C++, you need to link your code
against the C++ client library, and include `launch_control.hpp`.

For C#, run the following:

``krpc-clientgen --ksp=/path/to/ksp csharp LaunchControl LaunchControl.dll LaunchControl.cs``

To then use the LaunchControl service from a C# client, you need to reference
the `KRPC.Client.dll` and include `LaunchControl.cs` in your project.
